# Express Backend Assignment

This is a simple Express.js project for user registration, login, and fetching random users from an external API. It uses MongoDB for data storage and JWT for user authentication.

## Getting Started

To run this project locally, follow these steps:

1. Clone the repository to your local machine:

```bash
https://github.com/GreyFoxDev/express-backend-assignment.git
cd express-backend-assignment
```

2. Install the dependencies using npm or yarn:

```bash
npm install
# or
yarn install
```

3. Set Up Environment Variables:

Create a `.env` file in the root of the project and define the following environment variables:

```plaintext
SECRET_KEY=your_secret_key
MONGODB_URI=your_mongodb_connection_string
```

Replace `your_secret_key` with a secure secret key for JWT token generation, and `your_mongodb_connection_string` with your MongoDB database connection string.

4. Start the development server:

```bash
npm run dev
# or
yarn dev
```

This command will transpile the TypeScript code and run the server using nodemon, which will automatically restart the server whenever you make changes to the code.

5. Open your postman and import the given collection to test the APIs.

6. Run Tests:

```bash
npm run test
# or
yarn test
```

Once the server is running, open your web browser and navigate to `http://localhost:3000` to access the application.

## Production Build and Deployment

To create a production build and start the server, follow these steps:

1. Transpile TypeScript Code:

```bash
npm run prod
# or
yarn prod
```

2. Start the Production Server:

```bash
npm start
# or
yarn start
```

Make sure to set the appropriate environment variables, such as `SECRET_KEY` and `MONGODB_URI`, in your production environment to ensure secure operation of the application.

## Folder Structure

The project has the following folder structure:

- `src/`: Contains the TypeScript source files.

  - `controllers/`: Holds Express controllers responsible for handling HTTP requests and responses.

  - `db/`: Contains database connection and configuration files.

  - `middlewares/`: Contains custom middleware functions used in the application.

  - `models/`: Contains Mongoose schema models defining the structure of MongoDB documents.

  - `routes/`: Defines Express routes that map URLs to the corresponding controller functions.

  - `testCases/`: Defines test cases that map to APIs and controller functions.

  - `server.ts`: Sets up the Express application, including middleware configurations and route registrations.

- `.env`: Used to define environment variables (ignored by version control).

- `.gitignore`: Specifies files and directories that should be ignored by Git.

- `package.json`: Lists the project dependencies and defines the available scripts.

- `tsconfig.json`: Contains the TypeScript configuration for the project.

- `yarn.lock`: Automatically generated by Yarn and locks the versions of dependencies installed in the project.

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License. Feel free to use and modify it for your needs. For more details, see the `LICENSE` file.

## Notes

- The application uses JWT (JSON Web Tokens) for user authentication, ensuring secure and stateless communication between the client and server.
- User registration and login endpoints are provided, and passwords are securely hashed using bcrypt before being stored in the database.
- The server fetches random user data from an external API endpoint and returns it to the client upon request.
- The project is built with TypeScript to enable a better development experience and early error detection.
- The MongoDB database connection is managed using Mongoose, providing a schema-based approach to data modeling.
- The application follows the RESTful API design principles, providing clear and predictable endpoints for client-server interactions.
